Exploring Historians' Critical Use of Generative AI Technologies for History Education


ABSTRACT  The newest editions of generative AI (GenAI) tools demonstrate profound capabilities that promise to reshape education. It is of vital interest to determine how these applications will modify how the public perceives and interacts with history, as well as how history education is delivered. In this poster, we investigated academic historians’ practices and perceptions of integrating GenAI into their teaching. We conducted semi-structured interviews with seven historians who teach university-level courses. We identified the major concerns and perceived benefits of GenAI integration in history education, and some typical uses of GenAI in history classes. Our work contributes an important baseline assessment of attitudes and practices within the field so that we may better understand the existing gaps among academic historians and the extent of those gaps.  KEYWORDS  artificial intelligence, generative AI, history, pedagogy, education  INTRODUCTION  Education in the history field is evolving rapidly, and while there are many different approaches to handling generative AI (GenAI) tools in the classroom, there seems to be very little official guidance from either university or administrative leaders. GenAI has the potential to significantly reshape educational delivery, outcomes, and even content (Guo, 2024; Heaven, 2023). Thus, it will be necessary to develop common understandings and approaches to GenAI to maintain cohesion within the history discipline. Otherwise, the diverse methods employed in classrooms and research in the GenAI era may inhibit scholarly communication and undermine the common understanding of academic integrity. Such a development would have profound implications for future knowledge work. In this project, we investigate the perceptions and practices of historians regarding the development of GenAI tools that modify traditional pedagogical models. The overarching goal of this research is to identify the differences in opinion among history professors regarding GenAI. We seek to answer the following specific questions:  RQ 1: What are the hopes and concerns of professional historians regarding GenAI tools? RQ 2: How do professional historians use GenAI tools in history classes?  GenAI will have a tremendous impact on historical education. If handled improperly, GenAI may corrupt historical knowledge and be used to purposefully obfuscate difficult or inconvenient truths about the past. This study contributes an important assessment of attitudes and practices within the history field so that we may better understand the gaps in enthusiasm and concerns among academic historians regarding GenAI.  LITERATURE REVIEW  Applications like digital writing assistants, optical character recognition, and chatbots have helped students and professionals achieve their goals and sometimes bypass regulations since the early 21st century (Perkins, 2023). However, the new generation of tools, known as GenAI, differs significantly from its predecessors. It can mimic human conversation, provide real-time translation, analyze large text or image datasets, perform topic modeling, and generate original content (Perkins, 2023; Gefen et al., 2023; Biswas, 2023). Applications like ChatGPT can be integrated into discovery tools to answer search queries and serve as research assistants for students (Cox & Tzoc, 2023). This aligns with current educational trends favoring embedded and experiential learning strategies (Cox & Tzoc, 2023). While significant concerns exist about GenAI’s role in the future of knowledge work (Dwivedi et al., 2023), opinions improve substantially when discussing its potential to enhance rather than replace human production (Rane, 2023). By focusing on augmenting human capabilities, we can explore AI's potential to assist students and academics in producing innovative art, profound literature, and insightful cultural analysis. Additionally, AI could improve language learning outcomes and help tailor student-specific learning programs (Rane, 2023).  However, major issues such as plagiarism and academic misconduct related to GenAI use require investigation (Perkins, 2023; Gefen et al., 2023; Eke, 2023; Rane, 2023; Terwiesch, 2023). Plagiarism, generally defined as the unattributed use of another individual’s work (Merriam-Webster, n.d.), becomes complex with GenAI. These tools rely on large language models and draw upon sources in unclear ways, blurring the line between originality and plagiarism (Hutson, 2024). Current plagiarism-checking applications, such as Turnitin, are largely unable to recognize work created by AI (Perkins, 2023; Eke, 2023). Furthermore, GenAI’s capabilities, demonstrated by passing major exams like those at the Wharton School of Business, make it challenging to enforce bans (Terwiesch,2023). As perceptions of plagiarism evolve, educators must critically evaluate GenAI and explore ways of incorporating it into existing curricula (Roose, 2023; Blose, 2023).  DATA AND METHODS  We conducted semi-structured interviews with seven academic historians who teach history courses at a university to gather their experiences and opinions on using GenAI in history education. We used our personal networks to produce the initial sampling set of interview participants and then contacted future participants through snowball sampling (Wildemuth, 2017). Thus far, we have interviewed seven subjects, specifically 5 professors at Indiana University and 2 from other institutions. The interviews were conducted either in person or via Zoom, each lasting approximately 30-45 minutes. During the interviews, we asked participants a series of questions that focused on why participants choose to use or avoid GenAI in their teaching, how they have used these tools, the critical assessments of their use, and their general opinions and reflections on GenAI in history education. All interviews were audiorecorded for transcription and analysis. Given the exploratory nature of this project, we conducted an initial round of open coding on the transcriptions to identify trends in behavior and outlook regarding the use of GenAI.  PRELIMINARY RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  Our preliminary results identified positive perceptions, concerns, and typical practices of incorporating GenAI in teaching among historians. From the perspective of perceptions and attitudes, professional historians have expressed various hopes and concerns regarding the use of GenAI tools in their field. One of the main hopes among historians is that GenAI tools can assist students in framing ideas and improving their historical literacy through guided interactions. Such instruction methods might include students using GenAI tools to review their papers and provide suggestions, followed by the instructor and student critiquing the AI tool’s output (Participants 1, 3, 5,7). GenAI can be a useful academic and even emotional support tool for students struggling with their coursework (Participant 6). Multiple participants expressed the view that the pedagogical model for college history is outdated and that the inclusion of GenAI offers a unique way to provide students with more effective, individualized support (Participants 5, 6). Another opinion held that the value of collegiate education is indeed deteriorating but that GenAI tools will only hasten this decline (Participant 2).  Despite these potential benefits, historians have substantial concerns about the ethical implications and the overall impact of GenAI on education quality. A predominant worry is academic integrity. One position held that student use of any written material other than their own is plagiarism (Participants 2, 3). However, another view emerged that questioned whether students could truly plagiarize from a digital, non-human source lacking a stable URL or source link (Participants 1, 5). Moreover, historians are concerned with the quality of AI-generated content and its impact on history education. Participant 2 described the foundation of AI-generated content as “un-curated,” highlighting the fear that unregulated AI use could perpetuate misinformation and dishonesty. Additionally, historians fear that GenAI tools could undermine students’ critical historical-thinking skills. Two historians  underscored the importance of the time-consuming yet careful process of historical inquiry and source interrogation, which AI cannot replicate (Participants 6, 7). A final critical concern is the potential reinforcement of existing inequities within the educational landscape. AI’s reliance on vast amounts of data can lead to biases which reinforce inequity rather than undermine it (Participants 2, 7). This bias can disadvantage topics and perspectives that are less represented in existing datasets, thus perpetuating a skewed understanding of history.  In terms of practices, our research also found marked differences in approach between interview participants. Several participants possessed unique skills related to technology and digital history and therefore were comfortable crafting assignments that blended digital literacy with historical research methodologies. In each case, these assignments asked the students to critically engage with a GenAI tool and assess the historical validity of its output (Participants 4, 5, 6). For example, one historian gave students AI-generated responses as a baseline and then asked them to improve the responses. This method is intended to teach students about the quality of AI-generated content and to encourage them to engage more deeply with the material. This historian gives their students ChatGPT generated responses to their prompts. If the students merely turn in that response they receive a C grade. This innovative use of GenAI helps students understand the limitations of AI while also challenging them to produce higher-quality work. The overarching goal is to support, rather than replace, critical thinking by enhancing students’ interaction with GenAI (Participant 5). Senior history professors, however, tended to be more conservative with GenAI use in classrooms and adopted a “wait and see” approach instead (Participants 1, 2, 3).  CONCLUSION  In this pilot study, we identified hopes, concerns, and typical use cases regarding GenAI among academic historians and identified points of future interest for research purposes. We will conduct further research to investigate our initial findings in order to propose a framework for history classroom solutions for GenAI use.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  We thank all the interview participants who generously shared their experiences, thoughts, and insight with us.