The effects of generative AI on initial language teacher education: The perceptions of teacher educators☆

Abstract
Since the public release of ChatGPT in November 2022, generative AI tools—capable of creating human-like content such as audio, code, images, text, simulations, 3D objects, and videos—have gained significant attention. While the impact of these tools on language teaching and learning has been widely speculated, the perspective of language teacher educators concerning their influence on initial language teacher education (ILTE) remains unexplored. This study investigates how teacher educators, who play a crucial role in adapting ILTE to technological advancements, perceive the effects of generative AI tools on ILTE. Data were collected through in-depth interviews with thirteen English language teacher educators from all four Hong Kong government-funded universities offering ILTE. Findings reveal that participants believe generative AI tools will substantially affect the ILTE curriculum, instruction, and assessment. However, most participants believed they lacked the confidence and competence to address the implications of generative AI tools effectively. This study highlights the need for further research and training to support teacher educators in adapting ILTE to the emerging influence of generative AI.

Keywords
Generative AIInitial language teacher educationChatGPTTeacher educators

1. Introduction
In November 2022, ChatGPT was made publicly available, sending shock waves throughout the global education community. Since then, many generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) tools have been developed and released. GenAI is a type of artificial intelligence (AI). In general, AI is a term used to describe computer systems that use algorithms to imitate human intellectual abilities and skills and are capable of performing tasks that historically required human intelligence (e.g. recognizing speech, making decisions, and identifying patterns) (Sheikh et al., 2023). However, GenAI tools are markedly different from other kinds of AI tools previously available. Previously available AI tools were primarily designed to perform pre-set tasks using pre-defined algorithms and rules. These tasks can be filtering spam, checking grammar, or performing a specific role or function – as in the case of customer service chatbots. Such tools are trained on labelled data, where inputs and corresponding outputs are provided (Sheikh et al., 2023). In contrast, GenAI tools leverage deep-learning models to generate human-like content, including audio, code, images, text, simulations, 3D objects and videos. They draw on large datasets and/or the internet to generate new and unexpected texts in response to varied and complex prompts (e.g., scenarios, images, instructions, questions; Lim et al., 2023). Rather than deploying pre-defined rules, GenAI uses the underlying patterns and relationships in the data to create statistically probable content (Nah et al., 2023) (See literature review for an overview of GenAI functions and potential impact).
Teachers are important agents in determining society's response to GenAI tools. They need to prepare their students with the skills and knowledge necessary to engage in the world of GenAI. To do this, they should model ethical, legal, and safe ways to do so (Hockly, 2023) and help learners think critically about how AI shapes and changes society. This will require them to develop AI-specific literacy and competencies (Cervera & Caena, 2022), which may present challenges. Although teachers' digital competencies and confidence in using technology have increased since COVID-19 pandemic (Moorhouse, 2023; Lee & Jeon, 2024), the complex and diverse uses of GenAI tools necessitate unique competencies (Ng et al., 2023).
This paper is concerned with initial language teacher education (ILTE), which aims to prepare pre-service teachers for a profession that is already digitalised (Starkey, 2020) and is now likely to be highly influenced by GenAI tools (Chiu, 2023). As teacher educators are key agents in the process, it is necessary to understand their perceptions on the effects of GenAI tools (e.g., ChatGPT) on ILTE. They are responsible for reforming and adapting the curricula, providing instruction on best practices, overseeing professional practicum experiences, and assessing student learning (Korthagen, 2017). Thus, their perceptions play a significant role in shaping ILTE programmes, as well as, pre-service teachers' beliefs, conceptions, and competencies (Pajares, 1992).
This exploratory study collected data through in-depth interviews with English-language teacher educators from all four of the government-funded universities in Hong Kong with ILTE programmes: The University of Hong Kong, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Education University of Hong Kong, and Hong Kong Baptist University. It aimed to address the following research questions.
1.
How familiar are English-language teacher educators with GenAI tools?
2.
What effects do English-language teacher educators perceive that GenAI tools will have on ILTE and English-language teaching?
3.
What skills and knowledge do English-language teacher educators think they need considering the development of GenAI?
The findings provide insights into the perceptions of those who educate pre-service English-language teacher and lead to a better understanding of their needs as they respond to the development of GenAI tools. In addition, they will provide expert views on the possible effects of such tools on ILTE, allowing for the development of hypotheses that can be tested in further research.
2. Literature Review
2.1. Generative AI tools and language education
Language teachers and researchers have been interested in AI tools for many years. They have especially focused on chatbots and digital writing assistants due to their perceived utility for language learning and their ability to aid with self-directed learning (Fryer et al., 2020).
Chatbots originated as rule-based programs based on pre-defined guidelines extracted from external knowledge. Each was designed to perform a specific role and could not deviate from its pre-programmed answers. In the language classroom, they could simulate specific interlocutors (e.g. customer service agents) and discuss particular topics. Studies exploring the usefulness of rule-based AI chatbots for school-aged language learners have found mixed results. For example, Jeon's (2022) intervention study explored the experiences and perceptions of 34 young language learners regarding the use of a customised chatbot to learn English. The author found that the students who perceived the chatbot as an authentic speaker were willing to use it, while those who saw it as a machine were less willing to use it. In another study, Chiu et al. (2023) found that using AI chatbots increased the interest and motivation of language learners. Despite these positive results, the utility of such rule-based AI chatbots is limited due to the restricted number of tasks and outputs.
Similarly, digital writing assistants (e.g., Grammarly), which can evaluate user-generated texts and suggest alternatives, can be useful in language teaching. They can help students notice their common errors, evaluate their writing using pre-existing rubrics, and guide them to improve. For example, Lee (2020) examined how Hong Kong secondary school teachers use an essay critiquing system to provide immediate feedback on language learners’ writing.
In the ILTE literature, there was little mention of AI before the advent of ChatGPT. Even in the wider field of initial teacher education (ITE), there is a notable gap in studies exploring how teacher educators and pre-service teachers use, experience, or perceive AI (Celik et al., 2022). This may be because the limited functionality of rule-based AI tools makes researchers less interested in exploring their use in ILTE. It could also be because ILTE has been slow to adapt its curriculum and instruction to the rapid development of advanced digital technologies (Park & Son, 2022).
GenAI tools' ability to “learn” means they can be deployed in varied situations to engage in a multitude of tasks without being pre-programmed (Jiang et al., 2022). GenAI tools can generate text, generate ideas, analyze and evaluate data, summarise text, translate, engage in conversations, analyze sentiment, classify text, paraphrase, generate codes, generate images, and recognize named entities (Lim et al., 2023). However, the generative capability also means the content GenAI tools generate cannot be pre-defined, leading to issues with bias and accuracy (Rudolph et al., 2023).
The effects of GenAI tools on human behaviours and actions are becoming apparent. Examples of their use in various fields (e.g. law, medicine, education) have been reported widely. In language education, their potential benefits for teaching and learning are beginning to be postulated. Scholars have suggested that teachers can use GenAI tools to create lesson plans, tailor their materials to their students’ needs and proficiency levels, provide individualised personal feedback and, suggest bespoke learning paths (Kohnke et al., 2023; Chiu, 2023; Kuhail et al., 2023). In addition, GenAI tools could potentially play the roles of language tutors, students, partners, and experts (Hwang & Chen, 2023) - increasing opportunities for self-directed learning (Meniado, 2023).
There is evidence that these tools can have utility in the professional work of language teachers. For example, in a study involving 12,100 student essays, Mizumoto and Eguchi (2023) found that ChatGPT scored the essays effectively and rapidly in terms of the accuracy of language, potentially saving teachers’ time and providing students with prompt and informative feedback on their work. However, there have also been debates and discussions about the pitfalls of GenAI tools and their possible negative impact on language teaching and learning. Most of the initial debates have focused on bias or inaccurate information in their responses and the possibility of students passing off work generated by these tools as their own original work (i.e., plagiarism or ghost-writing; Kohnke et al., 2023; Yeo, 2023). Indeed, even linguists cannot detect whether written texts are generated by humans or GenAI (Casal & Kessler, 2023), suggesting that it is difficult for language teachers to do so.
In these early days, the possibilities and complexities of GenAI tools have led to plentiful speculation about their effects on language teaching and learning as well as the knowledge and skills teachers need in the AI-powered world (Ng et al., 2023). However, the perceptions of language teacher educators, as determined through empirical research methods, have not yet been considered. This study intends to fill this gap.
2.2. Language teacher educators
As previously mentioned, language teacher educators play a significant role in designing curricula and courses, developing intended learning outcomes, and teaching and assessing pre-service teachers (Korthagen, 2017). Their perceptions about what teachers need to learn, how they learn, and ways to assess learning can have a great impact on the skills, knowledge, beliefs, and attributes of pre-service teachers and, subsequently, their future students (Bai & Ertmer, 2008). A teacher educator can thus be regarded as a ‘second order teacher’ (Lindfors et al., 2021, p.391).
Teacher educators’ perceptions are formed by a complex combination of factors that have been shaped by their lived experiences. These include their own beliefs and attitudes about teaching, learning, and the role of educators (Hallett, 2010); content-specific pedagogy (e.g. English language teaching approaches), including knowledge of how to teach particular subjects and how to develop teachers' subject-specific skills and knowledge (Johnson and Golombek, 2020); contextual factors, including the socio-cultural, institutional, and organizational factors that shape their roles and responsibilities (Guo et al., 2019); current research and scholarship in the field of education (Darling-Hammond, 2017); and reflective practice, which involves the critical examination of their own experiences, assumptions, and practices (Mann & Walsh, 2017). Importantly, their perceptions are fluid; they continuously evolves in response to individual lived experiences and the aforementioned factors.
Although language teacher educators' perceptions of GenAI have not been investigated (Celik et al., 2022), in general, ILTE has not kept up with the technological advancements (Park & Son, 2022). Teacher educators have been slow to integrate advanced digital technologies into their programmes and instruction (Amhag et al., 2019; Ngao et al., 2022), which has often left graduates feeling underprepared for the technological realities of schools (Gudmundsdottir & Hatlevik, 2018). This can partially be attributed to a sense of digital incompetence among teacher educators; they do not feel they can act as a ‘digital role model for the student teachers’ (Lindfors et al., 2021, p. 390). In addition, Ngao et al. (2022) found that teacher educators may not perceive any real benefits to using technology for teaching and may even question the rationale for integrating it into their practices.
The capabilities required for a language teacher educator to be considered digitally competent will evolve as technology advances and its impacts on human behaviours, actions, and beliefs become understood (Starkey, 2020). Presumably, they will be expanded and altered by GenAI. At this stage, the ways in which GenAI will impact ILTE and language education - and the skills and knowledge teacher educators will need – are not fully understood. As mentioned in the introduction, teacher educators’ perceptions of GenAI are likely to shape how ILTE programmes respond to developments in technology (Ngao et al., 2022). Thus, understanding their perceptions of the effects of GAI will allow for predictions of how ILTE may respond to GenAI tools.
3. Methodology
The rapid development and adoption of GenAI tools, limited research on this area (Celik et al., 2022), and proposed research questions warranted an exploratory study informed by the interpretivist paradigm. The interpretivist paradigm assumes that knowledge and truth are created rather than discovered and is concerned with how individuals view reality (Creswell, 2014). Interpretivist researchers aim to understand and investigate why something is the way it is in a specific context (Cohen et al., 2018). We selected the interpretivist paradigm as we aimed to capture the richness and depth of language teacher educators’ experiences with GAI and how their experiences have shaped their perceptions of GenAI in the context of ILTE (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011). Although exploratory studies can adopt a variety of methodologies, semi-structured interviews were utilized in this study (Cohen et al., 2018). They allowed for flexibility in exploring this emerging topic, for the perceptions and experiences of the participants to be prioritized, and for complexities and nuances to be captured (Cohen et al., 2018). Details of the participants, research methods, and data analysis prococedures are provided below.
3.1. Participants
To find relevant participants, in April 2023, we reviewed the staff profiles of the four universities in Hong Kong that offer ILTE. ILTE is offered in two primary modes: a postgraduate degree in education that requires one year of full-time study and is available to students with a relevant bachelor's degree, and a Bachelor of Education that is usually combined with a subject content degree (e.g. a Bachelor of Arts in English) and is completed over five years.
In total, 24 teacher educators with relevant experience in ILTE and responsibilities were identified. E-mail invitations were sent out to all of them. Thirteen teacher educators responded positively to the invitation and agreed to participate. The participants came from all four ILTE providers in Hong Kong. Six identified as female, and seven identified as male. They had 3–25 years of experience in ILTE. Six were lecturers or senior lecturers, while seven were assistant or associate professors (see Table 1). To protect their identities, pseudonyms were used for the participants’ names, and letters were used to represent the four institutions. Ethical approval for the study was granted by the Hong Kong Baptist University Human Research Ethics Committee (REC/20–21/0218). All participants were informed in writing of their rights as participants, the purpose of the study, and its procedures and gave active consent.
Table 1. Information about the participants.

Pseudonym	Institution	Gender	Title	Experience in ILTE
Jerry	A	Male	Assistant Professor	4
Natalie	A	Female	Senior Lecturer	25
Yannis	A	Female	Associate Professor	10
Mira	A	Female	Lecturer	3
Rachel	A	Female	Lecturer	7
Robin	A	Female	Lecturer	25
Lennon	B	Male	Senior Lecturer	3
Daphne	B	Female	Assistant Professor	5
Derek	B	Male	Assistant Professor	3
Albert	C	Male	Assistant Professor	6
Steven	C	Male	Assistant Professor	4
Bosco	C	Male	Associate Professor	10
Bob	D	Male	Assistant Professor	8
3.2. Interviews
The data were collected through semi-structured interviews conducted between 19 April and May 11, 2023. Based on the participants' preference, they were conducted through Zoom or in person. Each interview lasted between 35 and 60 min. An interview guide was developed for the study (see Appendix 1). It included two sections: demographic information and perceptions on the effects of GenAI on ITLE. As mentioned in the literature review, teacher educators’ experiences with GenAI and their existing beliefs and attitudes about technology and GenAI shape their perceptions of its effects on ILTE (Johnson and Golombek, 2020). Therefore, the interview questions focused on their previous experiences with GAI tools, thoughts on how they will affect ILTE and language teaching, and the skills and knowledge needed by language teachers and teacher educators. This allowed for connections between their experiences and perceptions (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011).
3.3. Data analysis
The data were analysed using inductive thematic analysis following the process suggested by Braun and Clarke (2006). This approach aligns with exploratory nature of the study and the interpretivists paradigm (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011).
First, patterns and themes within the data were identified, enumerated, analysed, and reported with detailed descriptions but with minimal organisation (Braun & Clarke, 2006). Then, we identified the themes and sub-themes using a five-stage coding process: (1) Read and reread the transcripts to familiarise themselves with the data; (2) Generated initial codes, systematically compared them through a shared cloud document including the themes and sub-themes identified, and repeatedly cross-checked the datasets and the codes to check for salience and consistency; (3) Reviewed and organised the themes into categories associated with the following aspects of ILTE: curriculum, instruction, assessments, and the professional competence and needs of teacher educators; (4) Met and agreed upon the final themes and sub-themes (See Appendix 2 for the final list of themes and sub-themes); (5) Selected extracts to illustrate the themes to ensure and ensure that the data represented the participants' voices. Throughout the process, the researchers maintained close communication: checking for understanding, asking for clarification, and discussing any differences in their interpretation of the data (Creswell, 2014).
An additional stage was added to reflect the development of GenAI and its potential to assist with qualitative data analysis (Morgan, 2023). The researchers used ChatGPT-4 (provided through Poe.com) to analyze the data and identify any themes that were overlooked in the dataset. Before using the tool, the researchers decided to only use the responses generated by ChatGPT-4 for reference purposes to prioritize human interpretations (Morgan, 2023). The lead researcher used the following process to interact with ChatGPT-4. First, he used an initial prompt to analyze one participant's interview transcript: “Using inductive thematic analysis, code the following interview data to address the following question: What effects will generative AI tools have on initial language teacher education?” (See Appendix 3 for an example of the response generated). He then reviewed the responses before asking a follow-up prompt: “Can you identify extracts and keywords to illustrate each theme identified above?” (See Appendix 4 for an example of the response generated). All transcripts were analysed using this method. All data entered was anonymised to ensure privacy.
After the ChatGPT-4 coding was completed, the first researcher compared the themes generated through ChatGPT-4 coding to the codes generated by the researchers. Although there were differences in the wording of themes and sub-themes (See Table 2 for an example comparison of one theme of one participant's interview transcript), there were little differences in the scope of the themes and sub-themes. This stage increased the trustworthiness of our human coding (Morgan, 2023). No themes or subthemes were added or removed following this step.
Table 2. An example comparison of one theme of one participant's interview transcript.

Human coding	GPT-4 coding
Theme	Sub-theme	Theme	Sub-theme
Need for critical AI literacy	
•
Need to educate students and teachers on responsible use:
o
bias, false information and copyright
•
Students lack critical judgment of AI-generated texts
Critical digital literacy	
•
Awareness of AI biases
•
Misconceptions about AI expertise
•
Importance of critical thinking in AI usage
4. Findings
All the participants believed that GenAI tools would greatly affect ILTE. Lennon and Steven likened the development of AI to other technological advancements, such as Internet searching and Wikipedia. Lennon mentioned that just as teacher educators have ‘adapted and evolved to the use of Google search’, they can ‘adapt and evolve to generative AI tools’. He noted that this could lead to the better utilization of AI tools and more effective teaching and learning. Indeed, regardless of their familiarity with GenAI tools, all of the participants concurred that ILTE needs to recognize the existence of AI and make changes to the curriculum, instruction and assessment. For instance, Bosco said that he has little familiarity with GenAI tools, stating, ‘I think education and everything will change drastically. I think we have to embrace the idea there with some sort of solutions’. The themes identified were divided into the effects of GenAI tools on ILTE curriculum, instruction and assessment. The remaining themes were categorized under ‘the professional competence and needs of teacher educators.’
4.1. The effects of generative AI tools on the ILTE curriculum
At the curriculum level, participants perceived that GenAI tools would have three effects on ILTE: (1) Reviewing and updating intended learning outcomes; (2) Adapting program content; (3) Integrating critical AI literacy.
4.1.1. Reviewing and updating intended learning outcomes
The existing intended learning outcomes (ILOs) of courses and programmes, which indicate the knowledge and skills pre-service teachers need to acquire, were drafted before the development of GenAI tools. In fact, the participants mentioned that the current ILOs of their programmes do not adequately reflect recent advancements in digital technologies and instructional approaches, such as the flipped classroom approach; therefore, they must be reviewed and updated. To accomplish this, the participants suggested that teacher educators think carefully about the skills and knowledge graduates will need in a world with GenAI tools. Their responses suggested they have many questions about this, including the following.
•
How do we motivate learners to learn a language when tools can help them to write, speak and communicate in other languages? (Mira)
•
What will the language teacher's role be in a world where tools can help learners personalise their language learning experiences? (Rachel)
•
How do we prepare pre-service teachers with the skills and knowledge needed for this rapidly changing world? (Yannis)
•
So, from students' perspectives or in a classroom, why do we still need to learn English? Why must they still write essays if ChatGPT can do everything for them? (Albert)
•
At the course level, do we still need the traditional way of seeing competence as a teacher? Or do we need something else, a replacement of something? (Derek)
The development of GenAI tools has led teacher educators to ask fundamental questions about the value of learning a language, the role of language teachers and the skills and knowledge they need. Although the participants did not have clear answers to their questions, they did recognize that it is essential to integrate content related to the use of AI tools and AI literacy into the curricula of their programmes.
4.1.2. Adapting programme and course content
The teacher educators recognised the wide utility of GenAI tools for language learning and the professional practices of language teachers. Due to this, they noted that the content of ILTE programmes and courses would need to be adapted. Lennon, who had already started to include GenAI tools in a course he teaches, mentioned some ways in which they can be integrated:
Using AI tools like ChatGPT for lesson planning, creating quizzes and generating worksheets can save teacher educators and teachers’ time. While it might not always produce perfect results, it can be helpful in creating resources and assessments that can be tailored to specific needs.
Participants believed that ITLE programmes and courses should address the proper and productive use of GenAI tools. Some of the uses included providing ‘timely feedback’ (Jerry), creating lesson plans, materials and resources (Daphne), generating ‘example genres and texts’ for language input (Natalie), ‘simulating conversations with famous people’ (Lennon), generating ideas (Steven), ‘creating visuals’ for teaching material (Bob) and catering to diverse needs (Natalie). This list will likely grow as more teacher educators try to employ GenAI tools.
4.1.3. Integrating critical AI literacy
The most salient theme in the dataset was the need for both teacher educators and language teachers to approach GenAI tools critically. The participants showed awareness of the controversies and debates around GenAI, such as bias, false information, and copyright. They indicated that critical AI literacy should be integrated into ILTE programmes. This could include ways to select appropriate tools, prompt engineering training, and ‘critically evaluating and adapting what AI tools generate’ (Lennon). Derek mentioned that without these skills, teachers might unwittingly give up their ‘professional agency to the system, as they probably wouldn't know if [the responses generated by the tool] are right or wrong’.
According to the participants, the responsible use and critical judgment of GenAI tools are two essential skills that need to be integrated into ILTE. For pre-service language teachers to acquire these skills, they need to develop subject and contextual knowledge and experience. Jerry mentioned, ‘Subject knowledge is super important. Without that kind of subject knowledge, you won't be able to make fair judgments and evaluate the output generated by the system.’ Yannis highlighted the need to make students conscious of the different skills of humans and machines in dynamic classroom contexts, as ‘the situation of the lesson can change from 1 min to the next. So I think teachers really need those different types of knowledge from what AI can provide to be an effective teacher in the lesson classroom.’
The participants suggested different ways to integrate critical AI literacy into ILTE. Some suggested providing a core course on AI literacy and competence, while others felt it was best addressed in subject-content courses. Therefore, the best way to address this need for critical AI literacy is an area for further exploration.
4.2. The effects of generative AI tools on ILTE instruction
At the instructional level, participants articulated two key influences of GenAI tools: (1) Modelling the use of AI tools; (2) Integrating AI tools into classroom activities.
4.2.1. Modelling the use of AI tools
The teacher educators understood that if they want their students to use GenAI tools responsibly and critically, they must model how to use them in their classrooms and expose their students to different uses. For example, Steven mentioned, ‘We need to demonstrate to students how to use AI. We might model some ideas of how to use AI to generate ideas or generate feedback that [students] can use to complete your assignment or something. I think students might need to be explicitly shown how to use it properly.’ The teacher educators suggested that they should consider the different ways that pre-service teachers or their future students may use GenAI (e.g. planning lessons, developing materials or providing feedback) and demonstrate these uses. This modeling may also include ‘improper’ uses or examples of the tools' limitations (e.g., generating complete responses to homework questions) to provide space for critical discussions on productive and responsible uses of these tools for language teaching and learning.
Daphne shared how she modeled the use of ChatGPT for lesson planning, prompting the tool to generate a more communicative lesson plan. However, she reflected that while the plan was ‘good,’ she was also able to show that each plan that ChatGPT generated had similar activity ideas. She stated, ‘It used the same strategy of “think-pair-share” in each lesson plan.’ Moreover, at the time of the study, the participants were still struggling with the concept of the ‘proper’ and ‘improper’ use of GenAI tools. For example, Bob mentioned,
To be honest, I don’t know what uses are acceptable or not? How can I use ChatGPT in my academic writing and teaching? How about in my administrative work? No one has told us how we can and cannot use AI.
The admission by Bob shows the complexity GenAI tools create in ILTE but also in education more generally. On the one hand, they could aid teacher educators' and teachers’ professional practices. On the other hand, they need a clear set of rules or guidelines on what is considered proper or acceptable use of GenAI.
4.2.2. Integrating AI tools into classroom activities
In addition to modelling, participants suggested that GenAI tools could be integrated into classroom activities, with follow-up discussions to help students critically evaluate the use of the tools. The teacher educators suggested that students could be tasked with activities such as creating reading texts and comprehension questions (Natalie), lesson plans and materials (Lennon), preparing handouts (Robins) and providing personalised corrective feedback (Jerry) with the assistance of GAI tools. They could then be guided to think critically about the positive and negative aspects of using the tools to assist with these tasks. For example, using GenAI tools to provide personalised corrective feedback may save time, but it may mean that the teacher is not as familiar with individual students’ task performance (Bob). Similarly, ethical issues should be highlighted. Lennon used the example of the controversial AI-generated interview with Michael Schumacher (a famous Formula 1 race car driver) created by a journalist in Germany (see Holpuch, 2023) to illustrate the importance of engaging students in critical discussions around the use of AI in the classroom.
Rachel mentioned that these discussions may also need to focus on when not to use GenAI. She mentioned that because ‘generative AI tools are so convenient’, pre-service teachers may become over-reliant on them, ‘just relying on the AI without using our own thinking, maybe even for lesson plan writing, or maybe all their assignments’. This suggests that the effects of AI on human behaviour also need to be integrated into classroom discussions.
4.3. The effects of generative AI tools on ILTE assessments
Initial concerns about using GenAI tools in language education have centered around their use in assessments (Yeo, 2023). The participants in this study also shared concerns about this topic. Two themes were identified: (1) Improper use of AI tools; (2) The need to redesign assessment tasks.
4.3.1. Improper use of AI tools
The teacher educators were concerned about the fairness of assessments. Many participants shared cases of students using GenAI tools to complete tasks and the difficulties of distinguishing between proper and improper use. Steven described students using AI without acknowledgment as a ‘big issue.’ Similarly, Derek mentioned, ‘It's not easy to detect whether AI writes something or whether we want to accept that as part of the assignment.’ Robin echoed these concerns: ‘If our student teachers misuse it, we just don't know it.’ While she was aware of AI detection software, she was also concerned about its accuracy.
At the time of the study, very few ILTE programmes or their universities had clear guidelines on how GenAI could be used in assessments. This made it hard for the participants to communicate with students about using the tools. Bob has asked students to indicate if they used AI to complete their assignments but conceded this may not ensure students use them to ‘assist with’ rather than ‘do’ their assignments. The participants indicated they wanted more explicit guidelines regarding GenAI tools and assessments.
4.3.2. Need to redesign assessment tasks
The challenge of improper use and the understanding that GenAI tools will change ILTE made the teacher educators consider the need to redesign assessments. The participants suggested that traditional assessment tasks, such as writing an essay on a topic related to education and marking the final submission, were likely ineffective. Jerry said, ‘If nothing changes, students can easily do assignments or manipulate tests with the help of AI technologies.’ As such tasks can easily be completed by GenAI tools, they cannot be used as evidence of learning.
Instead, participants suggested that teachers should place more emphasis on the process and use experiential and contextual-based assessments. Mira stated:
Until now, we've been looking at assessment as a submitted product. We need to shift the focus and look at the product and the process. Students need to document the process that they went through to come up with this product. This will increase transparency.
Jerry gave an example of this in a video documentary project he designed. He said it allowed for the ‘recording of the real process of doing the social, linguistic investigation’. However, he is ‘not confident’ that students can avoid over-relying on GenAI tools when completing the task. Yannis mentioned that the focus should shift to more experiential and contextual assessments, with student teachers applying their learning in micro-teaching experiences, practicums and community-based projects. This would promote a more accurate understanding of whether they achieved the ILOs. Most participants conceded that it is hard to design assessment tasks that are compatible with GenAI tools.
4.4. The professional AI competence and needs of teacher educators
Although the participants showed acute awareness that GenAI tools will affect their professional practice, most expressed a lack of competence in using them. Only Bob, Lennon, Daphne, and Natalie stated they had sufficient knowledge and experience to use GenAI tools in their teaching. Only Lennon and Natalie had done so at the time of the study. Daphne and Steven had used GenAI tools in their research, while the other participants had ‘experimented’ with ChatGPT and other tools but had not used them in any professional tasks. All of the participants were keen to learn more about GenAI. For example, Bosco said, ‘I'm not that familiar, but I can show you I've got ChatGPT here, I wanted to try it, but I tried a bit. … It did give me some really cool ideas. It's scary because it can do things beyond your imagination.’
All of the participants indicated they need professional development and support to increase their GenAI competence. Robin said, ‘Things have been changing very quickly. I have to update myself because this is new to me. And when I know more about this, I can help my student teachers use these tools or these, you know, applications more effectively pedagogically more effectively.’ Similarly, Lennon mentioned,
Teacher educators should first learn how to use AI tools effectively themselves, including understanding the technical and pedagogical aspects, before teaching others. This will ensure they can model best practices and guide other educators in integrating AI tools into their teaching.
These comments suggest that – because teacher educators are responsible for preparing pre-service teachers for the language classroom – it is essential for them to engage in professional development so they can gain confidence in using GenAI tools.
5. Discussion
The study has explored the perceptions of teacher educators regarding the effects of GenAI on ILTE and English-language teaching. The findings provide valuable insights derived from key stakeholders responsible for shaping curricula, instruction, and assessment (Korthagen, 2017). They also raise important questions for further exploration.
Although the teacher educators reported different levels of experiences with GenAI tools, with some of them using GenAI tools in their courses already and others just beginning to explore their uses, they all perceived that GenAI would affect ILTE dramatically. Their experiences with GenAI and the hype around the release of ChatGPT have likely shaped their perceptions (Chiu, 2023). For instance, there has been talk about how GenAI will transform education or even hasten the end of current forms of education and schooling (Herman, 2022). In addition, their experience has led them to perceive GenAI differently from other previous AI models. Rule-based forms of AI, with their narrow range of functions, can aid in certain tasks, but not the many varied tasks GenAI can perform (Nah et al., 2023). The literature review confirmed there was little discussion of AI in ILTE before the release of ChatGPT (Celik et al., 2022) - and certainly, no concerns that it would disrupt or require the transformation of ILTE. The teacher educators’ perceptions of the effects of GenAI also seem different from studies exploring other advanced technologies (e.g., Ngao et al., 2022). The study shows that teacher educators see GenAI as a fundamentally different technology from previous advances. As they are key stakeholders in ITLE, these perceptions could lead to reforms and adaptions in curriculum, instruction, and assessment. The findings suggest ways this may happen.
The findings show the effects teacher educators believe GenAI will have on curricula, instruction, and assessment. At the curricular level, they recognize that GenAI will change the skills and knowledge language teachers will need to be successful. This will require ILTE programmes to review and update their ILOs. The teacher educators raised fundamental questions about the value of learning languages, the role of language teachers, and the competencies needed to learn languages. There seemed to be a consensus that if teachers continue using traditional teaching approaches, their roles could be diminished, and learner motivation weakened. Indeed, the ability of GenAI tools to perform many different tasks related to language (e.g., simultaneous translation) could mean learners have fewer reasons to learn languages. Furthermore, the suggestion that these tools could act as language tutors (Hwang & Chen, 2023) could reduce the need for structured human-based instruction. Yet, a study using a quantitative survey conducted by Ali et al. (2023) in early 2023, two months after the general release of ChatGPT, suggested that language instructors and students believe ChatGPT-based teaching could positively affect language learners' autonomous, intrinsic, and extrinsic language learning motivations. The authors speculate that the motivational effect could be due to their interest in the tool. Such results could be influenced by the novelty effect, where students are initially interested in a new technology because it is new and innovative (Jeno et al., 2019). It seems, at this point in time, that we do not have enough evidence to understand the impact GenAI will have on learner motivation or their desire to learn languages in a structured setting. However, this study shows that teacher educators are asking questions about the possible effects of GenAI on learner motivation and teachers’ roles in language learning. These questions need to be explored by scholars and considered when ILTE curriculums are reformed.
Regarding instruction, the teacher educators were acutely aware that they can play critical roles in modelling the use of GenAI tools and engaging their students in reflective discussions about the implications of these tools on their learning and future professional practices. Given the rapid proliferation of GenAI (Chiu, 2023), pre-service teachers must think critically about it and be aware of its effect. Although teacher educators are likely to be learning ‘with’ their students, this may not be a bad thing. Exploring, evaluating and reflecting on GenAI tools together could lead to the co-construction of understanding and knowledge (Korthagen, 2017).
As GenAI tools develop, language teacher educators must consider how these tools can be integrated with existing pedagogies, such as task-based language teaching, to enhance these approaches. In addition, they need to envisage new pedagogies, such as GenAI-assisted language teaching, where GenAI is fully integrated into language teachers' practices - assessing language proficiency and areas of focus, devising teaching objectives, being deployed in activities and tasks as assistants, tutors, conversation partners and group mates, and providing personalised language instruction and support outside of the classroom (Hwang & Chen, 2023).
The teacher educators also showed genuine concern about the effects of GenAI on assessments, especially the possibility of improper use. This aligns with studies exploring the concerns of higher education instructors more generally (e.g., Rudolph et al., 2023). At the time of the study, universities were only beginning to issue guidance on the use of AI in assessments (Chan, 2023). Although more universities are now providing clear guidance, their implementation has yet to be explored (Moorhouse et al., 2023). Furthermore, it is yet unknown whether these guidelines align with the needs of specific content disciplines, such as ILTE. English language teaching may be affected differently than other disciplines. It commonly uses take-home assignment tasks (Pecorari & Petríc, 2014; Yeo, 2023). However, the teacher educators also noted that assessment tasks need to be reconceptualised to reflect the needs of pre-service teachers in the GenAI-filled world. The participants offered some ideas, including a focus on process and the expansion of experience and context-based assignments. More research is necessary to identify how to assess ILOs when pre-service language teachers can receive assistance from GenAI tools.
Finally, the study suggests that teacher educators do not feel confident or competent with using GenAI tools or preparing their students to do so. Like students and pre-service teachers, teacher educators are learners when it comes to technology (Stockwell & Wang, 2023). Specific GenAI training for language teacher educators should be developed in consideration of their roles as “second order teachers” (Lindfors et al., 2021), and the specific effects of GenAI on language teaching and learning. Ng et al. (2023) provide an overview of the possible AI competencies teachers need. This could act as a starting point for understanding the needs of teacher educators, along with the understanding that ‘GenAI’ tools are different types of AI from previously available models, and require different competencies (See literature review). Efforts to rapidly ‘upskill’ language teacher educators are necessary. ILTE institutions must make it a strategic priority to develop all teacher educators' AI competence. As this study suggests, the effects of GenAI will be profound and impossible to ignore.
6. Conclusion
This exploratory study used qualitative methods to understand the perceived effects of GenAI tools on ILTE. By revealing the perceptions of language teachers - key stakeholders in ILTE - the study provides a good starting point for initiating conversations on the future of ILTE in an age where GenAI is ubiquitous. It found that language teacher educators believe that the impact of GenAI will be profound and necessitate changes to curricula, instruction, and assessment.
Importantly, this study represents the perceptions of the participants at the time of data collection. As the field of GenAI is developing rapidly, these perceptions are likely to change as teacher educators become more familiar with these tools. Clearly, more research is necessary to provide nuanced insights into various aspects of this study and identify how GenAI is affecting and changing ILTE. This study suggests that the following areas should be priorities for future research: (1) the effects of GenAI on language learning motivation and structured human-based instruction; (2) the impact of GenAI on language assessment – including proper and improper uses of GenAI in assessed tasks; (3) what constitutes critical GenAI literacy and how it can be developed in language teacher educators and pre-service teachers; (4) ways GenAI can be integrated into existing language teaching pedagogies and what new pedagogies can be envisaged e.g. GenAI-assisted language teaching. Finally, there is a pressing need for the development of theoretical frameworks that can be used to understand and analyse the relationship between GenAI, ILTE and language teaching and learning.